Engineering blog post: Dev containers (#156)
compilerla/compiler.la: _posts/2024-01-05-devcontainer-platform-agnostic-team.md

---
layout: blog_post
title: "How to support a platform-agnostic engineering team with VS Code Dev Containers"
subtitle: "Learn from the Compiler Engineering team, which has been using VS Code Dev Containers daily across Windows, Linux and Mac on all of their projects."
description: "Learn from the Compiler Engineering team, which has been using VS Code Dev Containers daily across Windows, Linux and Mac on all of their projects."
author: Machiko Yasuda
excerpt: "Learn from the Compiler Engineering team, which has been using VS Code Dev Containers daily across Windows, Linux and Mac on all of their projects."

> date:   2024-01-05 19:03:13 +0200

Author: the date? I am gonna update the date... to whenever the editors want to post it. I just had to put some kind of date in the past so that the preview link shows the blog post. (Makes it easier for others to review it)

> date:   2024-01-05 19:03:13 +0200

Reviewer: @machikoyasuda FYI, we will get you a date asap. I'm meeting with Milo today at 1:30pt to finalize our content calendar.

> date:   2024-01-05 19:03:13 +0200

Author: It would be great to get this blog post out in sync with or around the same time as the new Software Engineer job posting goes out!

> date:   2024-01-05 19:03:13 +0200

Reviewer: ooh good thinking. noted!

> date:   2024-01-05 19:03:13 +0200

Reviewer 2: Which will be... sometime early next week according to our current plan!

> date:   2024-01-05 19:03:13 +0200

Reviewer 2: cc @laneymangan I just updated the date above!

> date:   2024-01-05 19:03:13 +0200

Author: done

    <figcaption>A meta look at my code editor with Devcontainers running this website locally: VS Code on the left and the browser on the right. Within the VS Code app, the file editor is on top, while the bottom is a multi-tab pane with a Terminal - for reading logs, running command line tools like Git - along with a pane showing currently running ports, the debug console and test runner.</figcaption>
</figure>

On the previous engineering teams I was a part of, my first few days of work consisted of installing a lot of coding libraries, languages and tools to manage all of that onto my personal machine. For Node, Ruby or Python engineers on Mac, like I was, that might mean installing a slew of dependencies from Homebrew, Node, npm, Ruby Version Manager, Bundler, Postgres, Git and getting all the versions of each, to then be able to get the app’s various dependencies up and running for development. Then, you’d install your favorite coding editor and maybe even a custom Terminal emulator app.

> On my first day at Compiler, though, I only had to install three applications: Git, the [Visual Studio Code editor](https://code.visualstudio.com/), Microsoft’s free and open source code editor, with its [Dev Containers extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode-remote.remote-containers), and Docker. The Dev Container extension essentially allows developers to install the app they are working on, and all of its dependencies into a container, rather than the local machine. All of the code editor’s extensions and customizations are also run from inside the container. The engineering team uses the same container, so we end up with having the same development environment.

Reviewer: Can we make this either : 
"so we end up ~~with~~ having the same development environment."
or
"so we end up with ~~having~~ the same development environment."

To get the app running on my first day of work, I:

1. Cloned the GitHub repository
1. Created an environment file
1. Ran a script that builds the Docker images
1. Opened the repository with VS Code, and launched `Dev Containers: Reopen in Container` from the command palette.
1. Opened the application in the browser with the address listed on the `PORTS` tab.

And that’s it!

After the environment is set up for the first time, you can skip the first three steps. In the example of the Benefits application, going through these steps launches the Benefits Django app and the Eligibility Server Flask app. Running another command will start up the Documentation site, too.

> In the past, I’d [worked in Dockerized developer environments](https://web.archive.org/web/20200423065935/https://blog.reactioncommerce.com/dev-tips-debugging-reaction-docker-container/) that made it very difficult to debug the app easily. But with this setup, interactive line-by-line debugging in a REPL environment coems first-class with the code editor. By clcking on the Run and Debug panel icon on the left-hand side, selecting `Django: Benefits Client`, selecting some breakpoints in the code editor and clicking Play, the editor will switch to a Debug mode and allow you to step through each of line of code, and use the command line to inspect or manipulate any variables.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the past, I’d [worked in Dockerized developer environments](https://web.archive.org/web/20200423065935/https://blog.reactioncommerce.com/dev-tips-debugging-reaction-docker-container/) that made it very difficult to debug the app easily. But with this setup, interactive line-by-line debugging in a REPL environment comes first-class with the code editor. By clicking on the Run and Debug panel icon on the left-hand side, selecting `Django: Benefits Client`, selecting some breakpoints in the code editor and clicking Play, the editor will switch to a Debug mode and allow you to step through each line of code, and use the command line to inspect or manipulate any variables.
```

## Benefits of a platform-agnostic team

The benefits of having all engineers running and writing code from the same containerized environment and using the same code editor are quite clear: Less configuration headache when one engineer’s local environment has a seemingly un-replicable bug. But as I learned as I kept working on the Compiler team, I could see even more benefits of having this kind of environment supporting a team that has engineers using all major operating platforms.

From the perspective of a team and company, especially one that works on open source government software, being able to support engineers who use Windows, Linux and Mac allows the company to recruit people from a wider variety of industries and experiences. I didn’t have to, for example, retrain and learn the Windows environment to work on government apps, which often are built by Windows-only teams.

> As an engineer who focuses primarily on the front-end user experience, I feel that our team is stronger because we are testing the app daily on Windows, Linux and Mac, across various browsers. I no longer have to click through an emulator took like BrowserStack to check how the app looks and feels on Windows. Windows users aren’t second-class, and vice versa. A common criticism of all-Apple engineering and design teams is that they are not working on the hardware that most Americans can afford and use, and that’s not a problem here at Compiler.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As an engineer who focuses primarily on the front-end user experience, I feel that our team is stronger because we are testing the app daily on Windows, Linux and Mac, across various browsers. I no longer have to click through an emulator tool like BrowserStack to check how the app looks and feels on Windows. Windows users aren’t second-class, and vice versa. A common criticism of all-Apple engineering and design teams is that they are not working on the hardware that most Americans can afford and use, and that’s not a problem here at Compiler.
```

Often times, our team supports front-line government IT teams over Zoom, and having a team that understands all the major computing platforms is also essential for us to help debug issues on clients’ machines.

## Technical challenges and looking forward

So what are the technical challenges? I’ll be the first to admit that setting up and configuring a Dockerized container may be very challenging for a junior engineer - depending on how complex the application is, that might require a more senior engineer for the initial set up.

If you’re the kind of developer who has a very specific code editor - Neovim, Emacs or what have you - and a very custom suite of extensions and plugins, this way of working may not be for you. Having the command line and code editor integrated together might also not be everyone’s cup of tea.

> One of the greatest challenges our team has faced is running Cypress tests. The Benefits application has a suite of end-to-end Cypress tests that run a browser and click through the app – but we have yet to figure out how to get that all running in the container. We have to run Cypress outside of the container, which means downloading Node, npm, Cypress and its dependencies on our local machines. We’re continuing to investigate how to best achieve a fully-containerized end-to-end front-end browser testing suite. (If you have any experience or thoughts on this, feel free to chime in on our [corresponding GitHub issue](https://github.com/cal-itp/benefits/issues/681).) Perhaps a post in this coming year elucidating this configuration challenge is in the future.

Reviewer 2: The last sentence reads a little funny. One suggestion:

```diff
- Perhaps a post in this coming year elucidating this configuration challenge is in the future.
+ Perhaps a post elucidating this configuration challenge will be forthcoming this year.
```

Author: Rewrote the last part: https://github.com/compilerla/compiler.la/pull/156/commits/45cb3de4b73584e1f1d198fcdfe06e42768c5858
